## Day 9

## 09/07/2026

1hr 30min - 2hr Session (split into 2 parts , planned for 1 hr)

### Revision - 
(i answered these)

Q1. 
When would you use:

Ans.
* HashMap - count of stuff
* HashSet - duplication
* Stack - LIFO (most recent stuff)
* Queue - FIFO (order they come in)
* Two Pointers - used when two indices can efficiently solve a problem by moving based on conditions

Q2.
Time Complexity of:
```java
Arrays.sort(arr);
```
Ans.
O(nlogn)


Q3.
Two Sum II used Two Pointers.

**Why did moving the left pointer increase the sum?**
**Why did moving the right pointer decrease the sum?**
(Think about the property of the array.)

Ans.
sorted array

Q4.
Java syntax:
How do you:

Ans.
* Convert a `String` to `char[]`   - char[] arr = s.toCharArray(); 
* Compare two `char[]` - c == d -> XXX WRONG (chatgpt said -> Arrays.equals(arr1,arr2) , I DIDNT NOTICE IT WAS ARRAY CHAR , i thought it was character
* Check if a character is alphanumeric - c.isLetterOrNumber(); XXX WRONG -> its Character.isLetterOrDigit(c); 

---

## Concept - 

Today we continue with **Two Pointers**, but a different variation.

Yesterday:

```text
left ---------> <--------- right
```

Today we'll start seeing pointers move in the **same direction**.


---

## Problem 1 

### 283. Move Zeroes

Easy

so didn't go to college today and did this problem in the morning (for around 30-40min)

did this before (long ago) but i dont remember implementation to directly solve so starting from scratch

```java
class Solution {
    public void moveZeroes(int[] nums) {
        int zeroIndex = -1;

        for (int i = 0 ; i < nums.length;i++) {
            for (int j=0;j<nums.length;j++) {
                if (nums[j] == 0) {
                zeroIndex = j;
                break;
                }   
            }
        
            if (nums[i] != 0 && zeroIndex != -1 && i > zeroIndex) {
                nums[zeroIndex] = nums[i];
                nums[i] = 0;
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Runtime
150ms
Beats5.04%
Memory
47.76MB
Beats56.70%

took out pen and paper and brainstormed
really bad complexity cuz i used nested loops O(n²)


but couldn't continue cuz i had to go to startups india office for onboarding for internship (hopefully)

so came back at night , its 9:30 

and OH MAN 
i took out pen and book and started dry running problems 
but i couldn't find out a way to keep zeroIndex updated in correct way without a loop
like if i swap 0 and i+3 index or smth and there is 0 at i+2 index , i would skip over that , zeroIndex would become i+3 and error

even visualised on pythontutor but still , no fix 

spent too much time on this , almost gave up but then looked at the hints (Leetcode hints)
and it said - 

A two-pointer approach could be helpful here. The idea would be to have one pointer for iterating the array and another pointer that just works on the non-zero elements of the array.

didn't initially get the idea , scrolled through Leetcode comments and someone said - dont focus on swapping / dont focus on moving zeroes to right , focus on moving non zero elements to left

and slowly i got idea , completely ignore zero elements , just move non zero to left and fill the remaining with 0

came up with this - 

```java
class Solution {
    public void moveZeroes(int[] nums) {
        int index = 0;

        for (int i = 0 ; i < nums.length;i++) {
            if (nums[i] != 0) {
                nums[index] = nums[i];
                index++;
            }   
        }
        for (int j = index ; j < nums.length;j++) {
            nums[j] = 0;  
        }
    }
}
```

Runtime
2ms
Beats92.20%
Memory
47.66MB
Beats75.51%


time complexity - O(n)
space complexity - O(1)

LETS GO MAN
the question tricked me into focusing on the wrong thing (gotta think in the opposite direction sometimes)

chatgpt said - 
This is a common interview lesson:
If your current state is becoming difficult to maintain, ask yourself if the opposite viewpoint is easier.
You'll see this again in Greedy, Sliding Window, and Dynamic Programming.


---

## Problem 2

### 26. Remove Duplicates from Sorted Array

Easy

did this before (long ago) but i dont remember implementation to directly solve so starting from scratch

immediately thought of using a set -> 
but then realised i need to sort only the unique elements and not include zeros while sorting so had to use temp array
knew wasn't optimal but went too deep into rabbithole to leave it at this point so came up with this solution - 

```java
class Solution {
    public int removeDuplicates(int[] nums) {
        HashSet<Integer> set = new HashSet<>();
        for (int i : nums) {
            set.add(i);
        } 
        int index = 0;
        int size = set.size();
        int[] temp = new int[size];
        for (int j : set) {
            temp[index] = j;
            index++;
        }
        Arrays.sort(temp);
        for (int k =0;k<size;k++) {
            nums[k] = temp[k];
        }
        return size;
    }
}
```

Runtime
7ms
Beats3.70%
Memory
47.34MB
Beats9.19%


3 for loops man
really bad

time complexity - O(n)
Space Complexity - O(n) (worst case - set of N elements)


then started doing the two pointer approach -> 
came up with this ->

```java
class Solution {
    public int removeDuplicates(int[] nums) {
        int left = 0;
        int right = 1;
        while (right != nums.length-1) {
            if (nums[left] == nums[right]) {
                nums[right] = nums[right+1];
            }
            else {
                left++;
                right++;
            }
        }
        return left;
    }
}
```

but was getting error with this , like when nums[left] = 1 and nums[right] = 1 , then stuck in forever loop 
[0,0,1,1,1,2,2,3,3,4]

tried to come up with something like this -

```java
class Solution {
    public int removeDuplicates(int[] nums) {
        int left = 0;
        int right = 1;
        while (right != nums.length-1) {
            if (nums[left] == nums[right]) {
                while (nums[right] != nums[right+1]) {
                    right++;
                }
                nums[right] = nums[right+1];
            }
            else {
                left++;
                right++;
            }
        }
        return left;
    }
}
```

but was getting errors with array index out of bounds error and stuff

after struggling for so long 

GAVE UP ON THIS IMPLEMENTATION MAN

spent like 40-50 min on this itself

asked google for hint and it said -> 
The standard approach is a fast-and-slow pointer , Two-Pointer Approach that overwrites duplicates as soon as a new unique number is found

finally came up with this - 

```java
class Solution {
    public int removeDuplicates(int[] nums) {
        int unique = 0;
        int current = 1;
        while (current != nums.length) {
            if (nums[current] == nums[unique]) {
                current++;
                continue;
            }
            nums[unique+1] = nums[current];
            unique++;
        }
        return unique+1;
    }
}
```

Runtime
1ms
Beats78.73%
Memory
46.88MB
Beats24.26%

Time Complexity - O(n)
space complexity - O(1)

finally man , completed after spending around 50min-1hr on this single problem man 
didn't wanna leave it for tomorrow 

still need to work on two pointer man , i shouldn't focus on speed and completing each topic for namesake , i should complete each topic "properly" and then move on 

not the most comfortable day / easy day , but if i am struggling , then i am actually improving (getting out of comfort zone)
every sunday , review previous week's notes and stuff etc

LOT OF STUFF to learn from today's notes
