## Day 16

## 16/07/2026

30min Session

not a really productive day + its really late (10:30pm)
so told chatgpt that i can only do 1 question today 


### Revision

Q1. Binary Search prerequisites?
A.
Sorted List

Q2. Complexities: (Time & Space)
A.
* Iterative Binary Search - O(logn) & O(1)
* Recursive Binary Search - O(logn) & O(logn)

Q3. Difference between:
A.
* Standard Binary Search - search for element (arr[mid] == target)
* Boundary Binary Search - keep searching until we reach boundary
* Binary Search on Answer - 

Q4. Why do we use:

```java
long square = mid * mid;
```
instead of
```java
int square = mid * mid;
```

A.
int cannot hold square value if the number itself it large

---

## Problem 1.

### 852. Peak Index in a Mountain Array

Medium

took out pen and paper and did some dry runs and came up with this - 

```java
class Solution {
    public int peakIndexInMountainArray(int[] arr) {
        int low = 0;
        int high = arr.length-1;

        while (low <= high) {
            int mid = (low + high) / 2;
            if (arr[mid] > arr[mid-1] && arr[mid] > arr[mid+1] ) {
                return mid;
            }
            else if (arr[mid-1] > arr[mid]) {
                high = mid;
            }
            else if (arr[mid+1] > arr[mid]) {
                low = mid;
            }
        }
        return -1;
    }
}
```

Runtime
0ms
Beats100.00%
Memory
80.27MB
Beats59.63%

took like 5 minutes , fixing small errors like misusing < and > symbols etc , but caught early due of dry runs using pen and paper

T.C - O(logn)
S.C - O(1)

no hints but chatgpt kinda said this while telling me which problem to do - 

You don't compare `nums[mid]` with the target anymore.
Instead, you compare it with its **neighbor** to determine which side to continue searching.

that itself was the core logic!!

man i need to work on my pattern recognition
if someone randomly gave me this question , would i get the idea to use binary search??

i mean one hint in the question itself was -> solve it in O(log(n)) time complexity.

but yeah , need to work on pattern recognition

one more thing which i have realised is that , doing dsa everyday has become a part of my life
like its automatic at this point , i am not overthinking whether i should do it or not , i am doing it by default everyday

not depending on motivation , consistent habit
GREAT!!

